


1.4 OBJECTIVE
1.4.1 General Objective
General objectives of this research are to assess the pattern of Koshi river shifting and study of
damage scenario on agricultural or bare land.
1.4.2 Specific Objective
Specific objectives of the study are:
i. To analyze the precipitation patterns and frequency of Koshi river.
ii. To assess the change of agricultural or bare land area due to river shifting.


For River shifting
The quantification of the river morphology, spatio-temporal shifting is carried out 
1. download the satellite images for four different years, representing three decades 1990 , 2000, 2010, 2020 and for 2024, two or more image is mosaic when it needed. Landsat collection 2 level 2 tier 1 images from the non-monsoon season (October/November) having cloud cover < 5 % to avoid atmospheric effect. The satellite image of the monsoon season, which spans from June to September, was not used for the study due to extensive cloud cover, which obscures the satellite’s view of the river. Additionally, temporary inundation of the river and surrounding areas during the monsoon season complicates the assessment of the true channel’s position (Zhu and Woodcock, 2012; Martinis et al., 2015). Landsat Collection 2 Level-2 data is already pre-processed and ready for application, so the pre-processing step was not carried out (USGS, 2024).


2. Created a  polygon of the river for each studied years. Normalized Difference Water Index (NDWI) is a standard tool for segregating water bodies from land. It is based on the principle that water bodies strongly absorb light and emit low radiation across visible to infrared wavelengths, delineating water from terrestrial vegetation and soil (Mcfeeters, 1996). The raster layer of the river channel was obtained for all studied years and NDWI was calculated. Pixel having NDWI greater than zero were defined as ‘wet pixels’ and coded as ‘1′ while values less than or equal to zero were defined as ‘dry pixels’ and coded as ‘0′, following the method described by Mittal et al. (2023). The resulting wet pixels were then converted into vector files to create shape files of the river. The formula for calculating NDWI is given below: NDWI = Green NIR/Green + NIR (1)  where Green and NIR are the reflectance in the green and Near Infrared bands of the Landsat images. For Landsat 5, the Green and NIR band corresponds to Band 2 and 4, respectively while for Landsat 8, they correspond to Band 3 and 5, respectively.

3. the river’s east and west bank positions were identified for all studied years. Taking 1990 as the base year, an imaginary straight line (48 km long) was drawn approximately at the center of the river channel. A total of 24 station points were created at every 2 km along the reference line. To maintain the distinctive identity, each station points were assigned with terminology as S1 to S24 from downstream to upstream Some river segments might shift east while others might shift west, making it difficult to generalize the overall river shifting by taking the entire river section. So, to better understand the shifting, the river was equally divided into three sections - downstream, midstream, and upstream - each of 16 km, based on the length of the reference line. Downstream consists of stations 1 to 8, midstream 9 to 16, and upstream 17 to 24 (Fig. 3). A perpendicular bisector was drawn at each station points to bisect the reference line. The vector shape file of the river of each decadal year was overlaid and intersected with the bisectors. The intersection vertex of the bisector and the riverbank was converted into points. Then, the distance from the reference line to each intersected point for the east and the west banks was measured in meters using a geoprocessing tool called distance matrix.

4. Calculated  the SI to describe the winding nature of a river and quantifies how much a river meanders compared to a straight line. The SI is calculated as the ratio of the curved stream length to the valley length (Brice, 1964) and the formula is written as:  SI = (SL) × (VL) 1 (2)  where SI is the sinuosity index, SL is the curved stream length, and VL is the valley length (distance of a straight line between starting and end points) as illustrated by Mittal et al. (2023). If SI ≥ 1.5, the river channel is considered meandering, SI ≤ 1.1 is a straight channel, and the channel with 1.1 ≤ SI ≤ 1.5 is considered sinuous (Brice, 1964). The SI was calculated separately for the upstream, midstream and downstream sections as well as for entire river for the studied years.

5. The river width and water area was calculated to detect the change in these parameters over the studied periods in the fifth phase. Distance between the east and the west bank (i.e. the river width) was measured at each station and averaged for river section and the entire river (Debnath et al., 2017). Since the vector shape file for each year represents the water area for that particular year, it was used to calculate the total water area. The changes in water area, an increase or decrease, were calculated by differencing water area of base and final decadal years (Rakhal et al., 2021).

6. Calculated the shifting of the river channel for both the east and west banks for each station and river section. The difference in river channel shifting was calculated for each decade, as well as for the base and final year. The distance between the reference line and the east or west bank was calculated and assigned a positive value, if the bank lies east of the reference line and negative if lies west. The east and west bank shifting were calculated separately for each station by comparing decadal years. computed for each decadal interval and for the entire 30-year period. The average decadal difference in shifting for both the east and west banks was calculated, and the overall shifting was determined by averaging the shifts of both banks over the entire period.